SOURCE: https://www.ocbj.com/real-estate/santa-ana-bans-landlords-from-using-ai-apartment-rent-pricing-software/
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-03 19:36 UTC

Home
Real Estate

OC Homepage
Real Estate

Santa Ana Bans Landlords From Using AI Apartment Rent Pricing Software

By

Joseph Pimentel

March 9, 2026

476

Facebook
Twitter
Linkedin
Email
Print

An apartment complex in Santa Ana

To protect renters, city leaders have approved a new ordinance that stops apartment owners and landlords from using automated AI software to set rental prices.

“The purpose and intent of this [ordinance] is to protect the residents of Santa Ana from artificially inflated rental rates and unfair rent increases by prohibiting the sale, licensing and use of Algorithmic Devices,” according to a staff report.

Landlords caught using the banned software could be fined $1,000. The measure passed its first vote on Feb. 17, and Tuesday’s vote was the final step to officially put the ordinance into effect.

The ordinance comes as states and cities grapple with housing affordability and the rising cost of living for many of their residents.

Cities like San Francisco, San Diego and Berkeley have already banned similar software that uses algorithms to analyze private competitor data to set monthly rents.

“The Santa Ana City Council voted on a matter for which it lacked clear understanding – how residential property management software really works,” David Cordero, executive director of the Apartment Association of Orange County, told the Business Journal. “The ordinance adopted by the Santa Ana City Council is performative, at best, and exposes the city to legal liabilities at worst. Here in California, cities would be better served to allow the recently adopted state regulations to do their job rather than rushing to create a hodgepodge of local regulations that will be questionably effective and enforceable.”

A Closer Look at Price Fixing

A typical price fixing scenario: While searching for an apartment in Santa Ana, a renter might come across Class A (newer, modern), Class B (mid-tier) and Class C (older) buildings in different areas. But what they find is that the monthly rent is often similar, regardless of the building’s quality, location or amenities.

Apartment owners and managers often rely on automated systems like RealPage to analyze market data, suggest rental prices, screen tenants and manage revenue.

RealPage, based in Texas, offers revenue management software and services for the rental housing industry. It handles marketing, leasing, operations, and finances for more than 24 million rental units worldwide.

However, the U.S. Department of Justice said in a recent lawsuit against RealPage that many landlords and property managers have used AI software to access private data from other companies, including vacancy rates and lease terms, to collaborate and artificially raise rents.

Rather than operating in a free market, where landlords compete, they are allowing AI software to dictate their rental strategies, according to the federal agency.

The DOJ lawsuit was settled last year. RealPage did not admit any wrongdoing but agreed not to use competitors’ private data to set rental prices.

“The proposed settlement would help restore free market competition in rental markets for millions of American renters,” the DOJ said in November.

Protecting Santa Ana Renters

Santa Ana officials say the new policy banning landlords from using this software is designed to protect renters in a city where housing costs keep rising.

According to the staff report, Santa Ana leaders cited data showing the average rent in the city is about $2,293 per month, roughly 40% higher than the national median, while rising housing costs continue to strain many residents. More than half of Santa Ana’s residents live in an apartment.

“In the center of Santa Ana, a one-bedroom apartment is going for $2,100. That’s the mortgage of my house, a three-bedroom on a 6,000 square foot lot,” said Councilman Benjamin Vasquez. “So this is very much necessary because of how rent has gone up extremely in the city of Santa Ana.”

City officials said they will mostly use the existing code enforcement system to enforce the new rule.

Want more from the best local business newspaper in the country?
Sign-up for our FREE Daily eNews update to get the latest Orange County news delivered right to your inbox!

Sign Up Now

Would you like to subscribe to Orange County Business Journal?
One-Year for Only $99

Weekly in-depth coverage in print and digital formats

Special Features: OC's Wealthiest, Top Priced Home Sales, Giving Guide, OC500, Charity Event Guide, Best Places to Work, Indispensables, Largest Charitable Gifts

The annual Book of Lists: Orange County's top companies across every industry

Subscribe

Share

Facebook
Twitter
Linkedin
Email
Print

Previous article
Elixir MD Targets Faster Post-Op Recovery Time
Next article
Bimergen Energy Raises Funds for Expansion

Joseph Pimentel

Featured Articles

Behind the Scenes

Under Construction: See the Renovations at Laguna Cliffs Marriott Resort & Spa

Defense

Robotics Company FieldAI Set to Raise $700M at $10B Valuation: BI

Newsletter Feed

Yamaha Sells 25-Acre Cypress Headquarters

Related Articles

Behind the Scenes

Under Construction: See the Renovations at Laguna Cliffs Marriott Resort & Spa

Defense

Robotics Company FieldAI Set to Raise $700M at $10B Valuation: BI

Newsletter Feed

Yamaha Sells 25-Acre Cypress Headquarters

Automobiles

Rivian Posts 46% Increase in Q3 Deliveries

Health Care

CareTrust REIT to Acquire 45 U.K. Care Homes for $1.4B
